Introduction
 Some parts of this chapter are based on work presented in:
 Understanding Complexity via Network Theory: a Gentle Introduction,
 V. V., F. E. Rosas,
 arxiv.org/abs/2004.14845 (2020).
 V. V. contributed to sections 13 6.
 1.1 Complexity
 Many real-world systems are interconnected. A collection of closeby particles, a
 group of friends or nancial stocks are seemingly very di erent things. Interactions
 between particles are governed by physical laws, which may not necessarily apply
 to interactions between people. We can know every physiological detail about the
 human body and it will not su ce to understand social interactions between two
 people. Learning about every single particle within the neuron will not be enough
 to explain how billions of neurons form a conscious brain. All of these complex
 systems are intractable using reductionists approaches. Complexity science aims
 10
to explain such patterns of complex interactions.
 A complex system embodies a certain amount of hierarchy and interactions
 happen between and among its subsystems [1]. Furthermore, these interactions
 exhibit law-like and causal regularities, various kinds of symmetry, order, and pe
riodic behaviour [2]. What distinguishes a complex system from a complicated
 system is non-linearity of interactions between its constituents. The aggregate
 of them exhibits properties, called emergent, that are not attainable by summa
tion [3].
 An example of a non-complex system is a watch, which, with many screws,
 gears, springs, is a complicated device. We may even say that its emergent be
haviour is its time-keeping ability. However, we can understand the mechanisms
 underlying clocks architecture completely, if we take it apart. Thus although
 complicated, clocks are not complex [3]. In a complex system, top-down as well
 as bottom-up e ects can be observed. For instance, the structure of the World
 Wide Web (WWW) is dependent on the individuals, contributing to creation and
 linkage of websites. On the other hand, the navigation within the WWW by a
 single individual is inevitably dependent on the structural features of the WWW
 itself.
 1.2 Networks
 Networks are a useful tool to model a wide variety of complex systems. A network
 is an abstraction of a system that depicts interdependencies within it. Just as a
 map neglects aspects of the territory in order to focus on particular features of
 interest, a network takes away most of the richness of individual sub-units of
 the system and only retains the structure of their interdependencies. Networks
 allow us to study the collective properties of these dependencies. Additionally,
 11
as seemingly unrelated systems might have similar networks of interdependencies,
 networks sometimes allow us to establish non-trivial relationships between systems
 that share similar dependency structures.
 In the following sections of this chapter we review the main technical de ni
tions, used throughout the thesis. The notation, introduced here or elsewhere is
 also summarised in the glossary at the end of the thesis.
 1.2.1 Basic De nitions
 The interacting entities in a network are referred to as nodes (or vertices), and
 an interaction between two nodes is indicated by an edge. So in the simplest
 form, a network consists of a set of nodes with a set of edges between them [4, p.
 1, 109]. We de ne a network (also called a graph) as a pair G, consisting of a set of
 nodes V and edges E: G = (VE). The set V consists of all nodes: V = uvw
 and the size of this set is equal to the number of nodes in the network, N. The
 set E consists of all edges among nodes in V and its size is equal to the number
 of edges in the network, E.
 The type of network just described is the most simple. Nodes in this net
work have no internal structure, and in this sense are identical. For instance, a
 network can be used to model relationships between people. An edge in a friend
ship network of people indicates that some two people, represented as nodes, are
 friends [4, p. 37]. In this network, all people are assumed to be identical: they
 have no individual personality, status, ethnicity.
 If we want to incorporate more information, we can equip a network with
 richer structure. For instance, a node can be assigned a type. When there are
 two types of nodes in the network, and an edge only connects nodes of di erent
 type, a network is called bipartite, see [4, p. 123]. Such networks are useful
 to model a liations: a person belonging to a group, a company, a team. An
 12
example of a bipartite network is a share-holder network where an edge connects
 a company and a person, if the person invested in the company [5]. Bipartite
 networks can be generalised to multipartite networks. A multilayer network on
 the other hand allows for multiple layers, as well as inter-layer connections [6].
 Extra information can be added not only to nodes, but also to edges. Signi cance,
 strength of interaction can be represented with weighted edges, such a network
 is called a weighted network. In signed networks, a link can have a positive or a
 negative value. This type of network is useful to model polarised relationships,
 e.g. like and hate in social setting [7]. Lastly, edges can be equipped with
 orientation to obtain directed networks.
 Examples of networks are numerous. To name a few signi cant ones, net
works are useful to model social interactions (for example, see [8; 9; 10] and
 references therein), migration patterns, technological networks (such as the in
ternet [11] and the World Wide Web [12]), biological systems (e.g. brain net
works [13; 14; 15], protein-protein interactions [16]). In section 1.3.3 we will
 discuss examples of real world systems, that can be modelled as directed acyclic
 graphs networks that are studied in this thesis.
 Network theory is built upon a rich mathematical foundation of graph theory
 and statistical mechanics. To access the mathematical machinery, we de ne a
 network as a quantitative entity. Although many representations are possible, in
 this thesis we will always use an adjacency matrix, A. In the simplest case
 this is a square N N matrix that represents edge connectivity of a network with
 N nodes. For an undirected network each entry in the adjacency matrix is
 Aiujv 
= Ajviu 
= e if (uv) E
 Aiujv 
= 0 otherwise.
 (1.1)
 Here e is the weight of the edge (uv) and iu jv are indexes of nodes uv, respec
13
1
 u v w j k m n
 u 0 1 1 0 1 0 0
 v 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 w 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
 j 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
 k 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
 m 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
 n 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 u
 w
 v
 k
 m
 j
 n
 Figure 1.1: An example of a directed network on the right and its adjacency
 matrix on the left. There are N = 7 nodes in the network, E = 8 edges. Node u
 has an out-degree k(out)(u) = 3.
 tively. If the network is directed, this matrix is not symmetric, and if an ordered
 pair (uv) E, Aiujv 
= e, but Ajviu 
= 0 if (vu) E. An example of a directed
 network and its adjacency matrix is given in Fig. 1.1. Most often we will consider
 unweighted networks, unless otherwise stated. Having a mathematical representa
tion of a network, we can de ne various characteristics of individual nodes, edges,
 as well as the network as a whole. For instance, degree of a node is the number
 of edges that are attached to that node: k(u) = v G 
Aiujv
 . When the network is
 directed, two types of degrees can be distinguished: degree, based on edges point
ing to the node (in-degree, k(in)), and degree based on edges pointing outwards,
 k(out). For instance, in Fig. 1.1, k(in)(u) = 0, k(out)(u) = 3. We can calculate the
 degrees of nodes directly from the adjacency matrix:
 k(in)(u) = 
Ajviu
 v G
 k(out)(u) = 
v G
 Aiujv
 (1.2)
 When two nodes are connected with an edge, we call them each others neigh
bours. A set of all neighbours of u is called the neighbourhood N of u.
 In directed networks, N can be divided into a set of nodes that have an edge
 pointing to u, predecessors Npre: Npre(u) = v V(vu) E , and those
 that are pointed to from u, successors Nsuc: Nsuc(u) = v V(uv) E :
 14
N =Nsuc Npre. Those nodes which have no successors k(out) = 0 will be called
 sinks, and those that have no predecessors will be sources.
 1.2.2 Paths
 Networks become truly useful when there is a need to understand collective be
haviour of the system via its large- or meso-scale organisations. To understand
 such behaviours we study indirect, long-range interactions between nodes that
 operate via paths, walks, cycles. A walk is de ned as a sequence of vertices,
 such that there is an edge from each vertex to the next vertex in the sequence.
 A number of walks can be calculated from the adjacency matrix. For instance,
 in an undirected network, for uv V, [Ak]iujv 
is the number of walks of length
 k between the nodes [4, p. 136]. In a walk, the sequence of traversed nodes need
 not be unique.
 A walk, in which each node of the sequence of occurs at most once, is called
 a path. Formally, a path from u0 to uL, L(u0 uL) = u0 uL is a sequence
 of nodes, such that (ui ui+1) E i 
0L 1 . We will often look at the
 length of a path between two nodes, which is one less than the number of nodes
 in the path set, L in the above de nition. We will most often assume the shortest
 path distance between two nodes and denote the length of a path between uv as
 duv. In section 4.6 we will also consider the longest path distance between nodes.
 There we will call the length of the shortest path dSP
 uv , the length of the longest
 path dLP
 uv . We will also discuss the number of shortest paths between nodes,
 denoted as uv. The number of those paths that pass by a node w is w
 uv.
 In all but one type of network there are at least two distinguishable paths
 between at least one pair of nodes. If for all pairs of nodes there is at most one
 path connecting them, such network is a tree. The notion of a tree can be
 generalised to directed networks. An arborescence is a network that has one
 15
source node, called a root, and all paths from the root to any other node are
 unique. When multiple source nodes exist, the network is a directed tree [17].
 (a) An arborescence.
 u
 q
 v
 w
 (c) A DAG. An edge (vw) created a
 cycle, which allowed in DAGs, uvwq.
 (b) A directed tree.
 u
 q
 v
 w
 (d) A directed cyclic network. Edges
 (vw) (wu) created a cycle, which is
 forbidden in DAGs, uvwq.
 Figure 1.2: Di erence between an arborescence, a directed tree, a directed acyclic
 graph and a directed network. Flipping the direction of a red edge produces a
 second source node in the arborescence of (a), resulting in a directed tree in (b).
 In both, arborescence and a directed tree, there is at most one path between
 any pair of nodes. Addition of an edge (vw) in (c) or edges (wv) (vu) in (d)
 produce cycles, composed of nodes uvwq, so these networks are not directed
 trees, nor arborescences. A cycle uvwq in (d) is a feedback cycle which is
 forbidden in DAGs.
 Formally, when there is more than one path between a pair of nodes, a
 network has a cycle. A cycle is a special type of subgraph G. Generally G is a
 pair of nodes V
 V and edges E= (uv) Euv V . Asubgraph is a cycle
 if k(u) = 2 u V. If the cycle is directed, we must have k(out)(u)+k(in)(u) = 2
 u V. Di erences between an arborescence, a directed tree, a DAG, and a
 simple directed network are illustrated in Fig. 1.2.
 16
Various insights about networks can be acquired from the statistics of di er
ent types of paths. The shortest path between the two nodes (interchangeably
 called a geodesic e.g. in [18],[4, p. 139]) is a path with smallest possible number of
 edges. A classic example of the use of the shortest path statistics is for assessing
 positional importance of nodes. Here we refer to measures of centrality which will
 be discussed in great detail in Chapter 4. Furthermore, shortest paths are also
 used to nd optimal routes [19].
 To study dynamical processes on networks one can employ various stochastic
 methods, for example random walk techniques. Random walks are often used
 to model various types of di usion, and there has been intense research on the
 impact of network architecture on the dynamics of random walks. The niteness
 of a network, along with its irregular structure can make di usion on networks
 very di erent from di usion on regular or innite lattices. Thus the statistics and
 dynamical properties of a random walk can reveal information about the structure
 of a network [20].
 1.3 Directed Acyclic Graphs
 The main focus of this thesis is on a special type of directed network, in which all
 walks are paths, and none of the paths start and nish at the same node. We will
 call such network a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Although this is standard
 nomenclature, the name is misleading: if edge direction is ignored, cycles in DAGs
 do exist. So most formally, DAGs are networks in which there are no feedback
 cycles: walks that, following the edge direction, would start and nish at the same
 node. See Fig. 1.2(c) for an example of a cycle, allowed in DAGs, and Fig. 1.2(d)
 for an illustration of a feedback cycle, forbidden in DAGs.
 Directed acyclic structure occurs in systems with underlying characteristic
 17
constraint, which orders nodes and governs the direction of edges [21]. So if in
 the standard network analysis an edge indicates the presence of a relationship,
 interaction, or similarity between the two connected nodes, in DAGs an edge also
 indicates the hierarchical relation, causality, or order of the pair of vertices.
 Perhaps the most signi cant example of DAGs is that of networks ordered in
 time1. For instance, a citation graph [23] is a network in which both edges and
 nodes respect temporal order. In citation networks nodes are publications and an
 edge indicates a citation of one publication by another. In this thesis we will use
 the convention of edges pointing forward in time: an edge starts from a referenced
 paper and points to a referencing paper. In a citation network, an edge not only
 marks a reference but also indicates the temporal order of papers: a paper can
 only reference older papers that have been published already. We can say that in
 part, the temporal structure can be recovered from the topological structure of
 the network (where we do not necessarily know the real ages of nodes).
 Another example of a DAG is a food web. This network depicts prey-predator
 relationships between species in an ecosystem. Usually food webs are constructed
 by considering the ow of energy or mass between compartments (species) within
 the system [24]: there is an edge from u to v if v consumes energy from u, often
 meaning that species v eats species u.
 In practice there are often bad links which are in the wrong direction,
 from a newer document to an older document in a citation network or cyclic
 energy ows in a food web (e.g. cannibalism). In citation networks, this is because
 documents are published in di erent versions and the text available may not
 have been created at the time associated with the document in the data set.
 1Note that these are not temporal networks. In a temporal network, time at which edges
 appear is relevant for dynamical processes of the system [22]. An example of a system that can
 be modelled as a temporal network is email communication between people where a sent message
 from one person (node) to another is represented as a directed edge. In these networks time
 does not govern the directionality of edges, so time is not a characteristic constraint ordering
 the edges.
 18
For instance, a revised version of an arXiv paper carries the same index as the
 rst version. A journal article has several associated dates: rst submitted, date
 accepted, published online, formal publication date and so forth. Such bad links
 can introduce cycles and these must be mitigated. One can simply drop the links
 that do not respect the agreed order of time, or go against the order imposed by
 trophic layers. More sophisticated approaches also exist to remove the acyclicity
breaking edges, for example see [25; 26].
 Networks can also represent a hierarchical structure. For example, within
 software, many packages, programmes, algorithms can depend on other pieces of
 software. For the whole package to run smoothly, one must ensure that there are
 no cyclic dependencies. E.g. in python programming language, pandas library is
 built upon numpy library. We may say numpy precedes pandas in the hierarchy
 of software dependencies. For python to run smoothly, pandas cannot be a pre
requisite of numpy, so software package dependencies are another example of a
 DAG.
 Another DAG closely related to computer package dependency network is a
 task scheduling network [27]. Here tasks are ordered: one task must necessarily
 be executed before beginning another (to make co ee, beans are ground before
 being put in a co ee brewer). All of these examples are DAGs as there exists
 inherent causality within the system. Indeed, causal networks (Bayesian networks
 which are always directed acyclic graphs) are structures that represent conditional
 dependencies between entities within the system [28, Chapter 2].
 1.3.1 Basic DAG Properties
 The lack of cycles in a DAG leads to many special properties that distinguish this
 network type. Every DAG is linked to a partial order on its set of nodes. That
 is, DAG is related to a partially ordered set poset of nodes V in which nodes
 19
are ordered via reachability criterion. We say that an element a in a partially
 ordered set precedes another element b if these elements are related in the order
 and a comes before b. We write a b, with relation 
satisfying the following
 requirements for all pairs of elements, ordered in the set [29, p. 1-2]:
 Re exivity: a a,
 Antisymmetry: if a b and b a, then a = b,
 Transitivity: if a 
b and b c, then a c.
 In a DAG, we can say that whenever there is a path L(uv), u v. This
 relation between the mathematical entity of a poset and any DAG means that we
 can exploit the mathematical machinery of ordered set theory to study our DAGs.
 In the following chapters we will often do so.
 On the other hand, DAGs are di erent from posets. In network representa
tion, a partially ordered set is a transitively complete DAG, meaning that
 if L(uv), then (uv) E. Transitive closure [30] is a process of injecting
 edges in a network, such that whenever there is a path between two nodes, there
 is also an edge between them. So a partially ordered set related to a DAG can be
 obtained by performing transitive closure.
 Each directed acyclic graph can relate to at most one poset, however one
 poset is related to a collection of DAGs. DAGs, which have the same forms of
 transitively reduced network and transitively complete network, share the same
 partially ordered set. transitive reduction (TR) is a process of removing
 those edges from a DAG, which are not essential to maintain the connectivity
 within a network [31]. That is, if for an edge (uv) there is another, longer
 path which connects these two nodes, the edge (uv) is not essential and can be
 reduced .
 20
We can also order nodes linearly, that is, nd a topological order of
 nodes, i.e. put them in a sequence such that u comes before v if u v [32]. Such
 topological order always exists, however it is not unique. If there are two nodes,
 which do not have a path connecting them, either node can be put forward in the
 topological order. Such a set of nodes for which there are no paths between any of
 the nodes is known as an antichain. We will say that if u v and v u, u v.
 An antichain will be denoted A, A = uv V if u v . Conversely, a chain is a
 generalisation of a path, that is, if u v, then uv form a chain. In this thesis, to
 order nodes we will most often use the information about the inherent constraint
 of the system. An example of a constraint is time in citation networks, so the
 index of a node in topological order will correspond to its publication date: rst
 is the oldest paper, followed by the second oldest and so on. When there is no
 sensible metadata, we will use a topological_sort function of networkx library
 in python to sort the nodes. The algorithm is based on the description in [33,
 Chapter 7]. We will say that i is an index of a node u if it is in the ith place in
 the linear topological order.
 Another important feature of DAGs is that there is always a well-de ned
 longest path between any two connected nodes. We will denote the longest path
 as LLP and its length L. Furthermore, we can use the longest path to de ne
 height and depth of each node. The height of a node u, h(u) is de ned as
 the longest path distance from any source node to u; the depth of u, d(u) is the
 longest path distance from the node to any sink node.
 It is also important to note that adjacency matrices of DAGs are always
 upper-triangular, which are nilpotent matrices that have all eigenvalues equal to
 zero. As will be discussed in Chapter 4, this feature has important e ects on
 measuring centrality in DAGs.